ML5107- DISSERTATION PROGRESS  (5000 WORDS)
[DRAFT 22 NOVEMBER 2017]
 
 
NICHOLAS DALY
DR ELODIE LAÜGT – SUPERVISOR
MLITT CROSSWAYS IN CULTURAL NARRATIVES
SCHOOL OF MODERN LANGUAGES
UNIVERSITY OF ST ANDREWS

	
INTRODUCTION

The aim of this chapter is to explore how Abram’s specific understanding of language and perception may or may not be mutually intelligible with Bernard Stiegler’s narrative of techno-pharmaco-genesis, namely his claim that the human condition is ‘always already technological.’ The hope is that, by clarifying the conditions of possibility of Abram and Stiegler’s philosophical projects, we can elucidate points of contact between their thinking, and identify the ways in which their works might complement and resist one another. Being able to bridge the gap between their works is, in effect, a way by which we can enable new conversations at the intersection of environmental psychology, aesthetics, and the phenomenology of technics, with consequences for navigating the complex world in which we live with appropriate conceptual equipment. 

In order to proceed in this specific endeavor, we need to begin by (1) briefly mapping the scope of their projects, understanding their cultural, linguistic, and philosophical heritage. This will provide the necessary background to their ontological propositions, from whence we can (2) take a critical look at Abram’s use of Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy on perception and language to demonstrate the extent to which Abram’s project expressly rejects much of post-structuralist thought, while similarly engaging in a rethinking of the hierarchies of speech-writing and orality-literacy. Once Abram’s engagement with Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy and specific critiques of Derrida’s work are established, we can shift into (3) an investigation of how Derrida had treated Merleau-Ponty’s work. Post-structuralist philosophy has been in constant engagement with the phenomenological tradition, yet Derrida- well-known as an exemplar of thorough reader- wrote surprisingly little about Merleau-Ponty’s work. Understanding why this might be the case can offer further context for Abram’s specific critiques of Derrida’s work and [4] a comparison with Stiegler’s reworking of Derrida’s ideas about writing. Once we have compared their phenomenological responses to post-structuralist thought, we will have created a basic framework for understanding how Abram’s environmental philosophy is partially- if not fundamentally- a phenomenological approach to the ethics of technology embedded within environmentalist or ecophilosophical aesthetic. This will allow us to articulate the extent to which much academic work on environmental ethics is nowadays synonymous with an ethics of technology insofar as both operate as social critiques at the level of the individual, psychological, and perceptual. This opens the doors to the construction of an eco-phenomenological approach to the ethics of technology, which will permit us to think the history and nature of the concepts of ‘disenchantment’ and ‘re-enchantment’ in new ways. 



PASO 1: BRIEF MAP OF THEIR PROJECTS : “THE CONDITIONS OF POSSIBILITY”

The work of Abram and Stiegler emerge from different philosophical and literary traditions with distinct approaches to nature, environment, and technology. Despite these differences, their different career trajectories have led them to similar roles as independent philosophers and public intellectuals who speak the language of the academy while remaining on the outside. Each created their own educational institutes and work with cultural academic organizations while continuing to publish scholarship through traditional channels.  


They come from different places. Abram is eco-hippie magician, Stiegler is a convicted robber-cum-French intellectual. 
They both ended up pursuing similar philosophical problems and also both chose to operate outside the Academy, teaching at their own institutes and publishing through both traditional channels and modern media..
	Their projects center around the act of exploring the causes and solutions to what Max Weber identified as a ‘disenchantment’ of modern society.
	They focus on different aspects of a similarly framed problem. Abram approaches from an American environmentalist and anthropological tradition and Stiegler begins specifically with Heidegger’s question of technology and psychoanalysis and greek myths. 
Actually they are doing the same thing. 
Both have written extensively about the relationship between technology, the body, and perception and share 
politically and ethically, their projects are aligned. 


 around the  that so  two-part identifying the causes of what they identify as an epidemic of disenchantment in Europe and North America and outline potential solutions

. 

Their work shares an anti-consumerist bent and a concern for charting a course beyond the malaise of industrial populism to an idealized place of enchanted psychic well-being and engagement with the world.  In some ways, despite adopting a concern for the fate of the global communities, they might be seen as extremely national in character. They work from within different social and cultural possibilities which have each led to different approaches to a similar object of philosophical concern- the perceptual implications of technology and its implications for psychic well-being and ethics.  

and different engagement with knowledge from other academic disciplines or from beyond the academy. As a result, despite many parallels, they are not obvious or easy to read together and so the most straightforward way to begin is from within, by understanding in which ways their ontological and epistemological understandings of the world overlap and diverge and how these similarities and differences afford or prevent a fruitful synthesis of their projects.





PASO 2  ABRAM’S MERLEAU-PONTY/ABRAM’S DERRIDA - “BODILY PERCEPTION AND THE ECOLOGICAL LIMITS TO GRAMMATOLOGY”

Abram’s first and most influential book, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a  More-Than-Human World, begins with a personal introduction which serves the dual function of acclimatizing readers to his literary language and reinforcing from the outset a phenomenological approach to perception and to knowledge production. His inquiry is presented as necessarily biographical and experiential, having grown out of his intimate experiences with shamans and medicine men in Indonesia and  as a sleight-of-hand magician and researcher in traditional medicine in Indonesia and Nepal- 


Summary of Ch 2


Abram, following Merleau-Ponty, conceives of perception as a reciprocal and participatory act between subjectivities. He argues that though we think of subjectivities as a human phenomena, closer examination reveals that animal subjectivities or any phenomena perceived is necessarily also co-creating our perceptions. This justifies an animistic world view for Abram, which has been largely marginalized in the history of Western thought.   He sees human language as fundamentally an affective physical gesture from which semantic meaning emerges through a process of appropriation and abstraction. He extends Merleau-Ponty’s work to make the case that just as human speech is a bodily phenomena, language in general is an ecological phenomenon embedded in the larger flesh of the world. 

Beginning with this ontological foundation, Abram then takes his readers through an account of the development of the technology of phonetic writing as the main culprit behind our sense of displacement  and disconnect from sensuous encounters with the world that we co-create in a reciprocal and participatory act of perception. Abram makes the case that our relationship to the written word directly corresponds to our violent treatment of nature, and thus revitalizing animism and rediscovering the sensual foundations of oral speech is an effective way to advance environmental ethics at the level of the perceptual. 




PASO 3  DERRIDA’S TWIN MERLEAU-PONTYS - “WHY SO SERIOUS?”

No work has yet been done to compare Abram and Stiegler, however there has been new work emerging which does the task of comparing the work of their philosophical predecessors, Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Derrida (MENTION NAMES). The few books written attempts to solve the mystery of why Derrida engaged so little with the writing of Merleau-Ponty and how Merleau-Ponty’s understanding of the body as the origin of perception and language as contact challenges Derrida’s deconstruction of speech-writing hierarchies in his famous work, Of Grammatology. The works move beyond a basic opposition of phenomenology and deconstruction, and tend to look for conceptual resources from the former to permit new ways of thinking ontology in the latter, or even thinking ontology beyond deconstruction and difference. 

Outlining their arguments helps us establish a precedent for our own delicate philosophical combinatorics. Do Abram’s eco-phenomenology and Stiegler’s reconstruction project resist each other in similar ways that Merleau-Ponty and Derrida’s work do, or in updating and expanding the work of their predecessors, do these new philosophical projects afford greater compatibility and synthesis than the systems they inherited? 


PASO 4:   ANALYSIS- IMAGINING ABRAM’S STIEGLER AND STIEGLER’S ABRAM:


4.1 Summary and Analysis of The Flesh of Language 
	Understanding the body-rootedness as an already technological phenomena

Creating a synthetic account will require understanding Abram’s body-rootedness as an already technological phenomena by embedding his account of an orality-literacy binary and development of the technology of phonetic alphabets (following Ong and Goody) within Stiegler’s narrative of the originary condition of man as always already technological.


4.2 Summary and Analysis of Animism and the Alphabet
	Embedding the orality-literacy binary narrative within the narrative of originary technics
Abram synthesizes Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy of language with environmental philosophy through a re-telling of the history of the development of phonetic alphabets from the Phoenecians through the Hebrews to modern day. 4.3 Summary and Analysis of In the Landscape of Language
4.4 Summary and Analysis of Time, Space and the Eclipse of the Earth

4.5 Summary and Analysis of Forgetting and Remembering of the Air 
	 Understanding technics as part of The Commonwealth of the Air. Do Technics breath?




CONCLUSION: WHAT REMAINS TO BE DONE IN THE REST OF THE THESIS
  After this, we can see how well Stiegler’s technics- as inorganic organized matter which constitutes exosomatic memory and shapes our perception of time- can be understood as an ecological phenomena worthy of acknowledgement and with which we might develop relationships based in reciprocity, animistic entities which Abram might consider part of a larger ‘commonwealth of the air’, a living bre(a)thren in a more-than-human cosmos. 

 

a.       ROSS ARGUMENT FROM STIEGLER AND TECHNICS 
                                                               i.      In order to combine Abram and Stiegler’s thinking in mutually beneficial ways, one must first understand the ways that each expands and updates the philosophies they inherited.  In his essay, Pharmacology and Critique after Deconstruction, author, translator and film director Daniel Ross outlines Stiegler’s relationship to Derrida and the project of Deconstruction. The chapter begins with a quote from Stiegler’s États de choc in which Stiegler comments on the burden of his philosophical inheritance as a contemporary French thinker. The combined thinking of his immediate predecessors (Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze, Baudrillard, Althusser, Lyotard) simultaneously has delivered upon its heirs a legacy of semantic fetishism and an inability to think alternatives to .    Ross claims that ‘Stiegler inherits more from Derrida than from any other thinker’ (245) and reworks Derridian deconstruction into a project of ‘compositional’ thinking. He does this by equating deconstruction’s process of difference to Gilbert Simondon’s understanding of ‘individuation as process’ and using  . (245) 
b.       Rejection of the project of deconstruction in place of reconstruction

 
